.\" Man page for artty
.\" 
.\" This man page follows the standard UNIX man page format.
.\" Sections: NAME, SYNOPSIS, DESCRIPTION, OPTIONS, EXAMPLES, 
.\" ENVIRONMENT, FILES, EXIT STATUS, SEE ALSO, AUTHOR, COPYRIGHT
.\"
.TH ARTTY "1" "April 2026" "artty 0.1.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
\fBartty\fR \- Convert images to detailed braille ASCII art
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B artty \fIINPUT\fR [\fB\-o\fR|\fB\-\-output\fR \fIFILE\fR] [\fB\-\-preview\fR|\fB\-\-no\-preview\fR]
[\fB\-\-no\-save\fR] [\fB\-w\fR|\fB\-\-width\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB\-t\fR|\fB\-\-threshold\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-padding\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB\-\-contrast\fR \fIFLOAT\fR] [\fB\-\-sharpness\fR \fIFLOAT\fR]
[\fB\-\-color\fR|\fB\-\-no\-color\fR] [\fB\-\-boost\fR \fIFLOAT\fR] [\fB\-\-bg\fR \fIR\fR \fIG\fR \fIB\fR]
[\fB\-\-hide\-paths\fR] [\fB\-v\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR] [\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBartty\fR is a CLI tool that converts images to detailed braille ASCII art with
accurate color embedding or plain text output. It uses Unicode braille
characters to represent image detail, outputting either 24\-bit ANSI color
sequences or plain text.
.PP
The tool reads an input image and converts it to a text representation using
Unicode braille patterns (U+2800 to U+28FF). Each braille cell represents
a 2x3 pixel block, with the dots within the cell representing which pixels
are above the luminance threshold.
.PP
When color mode is enabled (\fB\-\-color\fR), the output includes ANSI escape
codes that set the foreground color for each braille cell, producing a colored
pixel\-accurate representation in terminals that support 24\-bit color.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "Input and Output"
.TP
\fBINPUT\fR
Path to the input image file (required). Supported formats include PNG,
JPEG, GIF, BMP, TIFF, and WebP.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR \fIFILE\fR\fB, \-\-output\fR=\fIFILE\fR
Where to save the output .txt file. Accepts a full file path or a directory.
If a directory is given, the filename is derived from the input image name.
Defaults to the same directory as the input image.
.TP
\fB\-\-preview\fR|\fB\-\-no\-preview\fR
Print (or suppress) the result to the terminal after saving.
Default is \fB\-\-preview\fR (enabled).
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-save\fR
Do not write a .txt file; only print to stdout. Useful for piping or
previewing without saving.
.TP
\fB\-\-hide\-paths\fR
Show only filenames in output messages, hiding full paths.
.SS "Dimensions"
.TP
\fB\-w\fR \fIN\fR\fB, \-\-width\fR=\fIN\fR
Output width in braille characters. Height is auto\-calculated based
on the image aspect ratio. Valid range: 10 to 500. Default is 100.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR \fIN\fR\fB, \-\-threshold\fR=\fIN\fR
Luminance threshold (0\-255). Pixels brighter than this become raised
braille dots; darker pixels become empty dots. Lower values produce
denser output; higher values produce sparser output. Default is 50.
.TP
\fB\-\-padding\fR \fIN\fR
Pixels of padding around auto\-detected content. Used when cropping the
input image to focus on the main subject. Default is 30.
.SS "Image Processing"
.TP
\fB\-\-contrast\fR \fIFLOAT\fR
Contrast enhancement factor. A value of 1.0 leaves contrast unchanged;
values greater than 1.0 increase contrast, values less than 1.0 decrease
it. Default is 1.0.
.TP
\fB\-\-sharpness\fR \fIFLOAT\fR
Sharpness enhancement factor. A value of 1.0 leaves sharpness unchanged;
values greater than 1.0 increase sharpness, values less than 1.0 decrease
it. Default is 1.0.
.SS "Color Options"
.TP
\fB\-\-color\fR|\fB\-\-no\-color\fR
Enable or disable 24\-bit ANSI color output. When enabled, each
braille cell is colored to match the average color of the pixels
it represents. Default is \fB\-\-color\fR (enabled).
.TP
\fB\-\-boost\fR \fIFLOAT\fR
Color brightness multiplier for better visibility on terminals.
Typical values range from 1.0 to 1.4. Default is 1.2.
.TP
\fB\-\-bg\fR \fIR\fR \fIG\fR \fIB\fR
Add a solid ANSI background color. Specify three integers (0\-255)
representing the red, green, and blue components. For example,
\fB\-\-bg 0 0 0\fR produces a black background.
.SS "Help and Version"
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \-\-version\fR
Show the version number and exit.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \-\-help\fR
Show the help message and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Basic conversion:
.B artty
logo.png
.TP
Convert with custom width and no color:
.B artty
logo.png \-\-no\-color \-\-width 80
.TP
Save to a specific location:
.B artty
photo.jpg \-o ~/Desktop/output.txt \-w 120
.TP
Increase threshold for sparser output:
.B artty
image.png \-\-threshold 128 \-\-width 60
.TP
Add black background and high contrast:
.B artty
screenshot.png \-\-bg 0 0 0 \-\-contrast 1.5
.TP
Pipe output to another program (no save):
.B artty
input.png \-\-no\-save | less \-R
.SH ENVIRONMENT
\fBartty\fR does not use any environment variables. Configuration is
handled entirely via command\-line options.
.SH FILES
\fBartty\fR does not require any configuration files. Output files are
created only when explicitly specified via the \fB\-\-output\fR option
or when the default behavior writes to the input directory.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Success. The image was converted and optionally saved.
.TP
1
Error. An error occurred during conversion, such as:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Invalid input file or file not found
.IP \(bu 2
Unsupported image format
.IP \(bu 2
Invalid option values (e.g., negative contrast)
.IP \(bu 2
Permission denied when writing output file
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
Full documentation:
.I https://github.com/divisionseven/artty#readme
.TP
Issue tracker:
.I https://github.com/divisionseven/artty/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Written by divisionseven.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 divisionseven. MIT License.